- my mother decided I was depressed
- depression is a side effect of dying
- the Support Group was depressing as hell
- Me: “I refuse to attend Support Group.”
- Mom: “If you want me to be a teenager, don’t send me to Support Group.”
- Support Group blew
- Augustus Waters, I tried my level best to get out of Support Group
- Mom: “Hazel, you deserve a life.”
- biting it from cancer when you’re sixteen
- having a kid who bites it from cancer
- a form of assault
- unwelcome boy staring
- like his whole head was basically just this fake eye and this real eye staring at you
"I mean, it’s gotta be dangerous, storing children with cancer in your heart."
"I would tell Him myself," Augustus said, "but unfortunately I am literally stuck inside of His heart, so He won’t be able to hear me."
"I hardly know you, Augustus Waters. You could be an ax murderer."
"You're killing my vibe here, Hazel Grace."
"You think that's cool? Oh, my God, you just ruined the whole thing."
"But of course there is always a hamartia and yours is that oh, my God, even though you HAD FREAKING CANCER you give money to a company in exchange for the chance to acquire YET MORE CANCER."
"I felt this weird mix of disappointment and anger welling up inside of me."
Here are the sentences with a negative sentiment:
- Augustus Waters drove horrifically.
- his driving was so astonishingly poor that I could think of nothing else.
- “I failed the driving test three times.”
- “Your driving is unpleasant, but it isn’t technically unsafe.”
- Augustus slammed the gas.
- I considered lying. No one likes a corpse, after all.
- “No, my parents withdrew me three years ago.”
- diagnosed with Stage IV thyroid cancer when I was thirteen.
- my lungs started to fill up with water.
- I was looking pretty dead—my hands and feet ballooned; my skin cracked; my lips were perpetually blue.
- But even so, there’s a certain unpleasantness to drowning, particularly when it occurs over the course of several months.
- I finally ended up in the ICU with pneumonia.
- I was embarrassed by their desperation, disgusted that they wouldn’t just let go.
- And I remember wanting not to be awake.
- Everyone figured I was finished.
- one of those experimental trials that are famous in the Republic of Cancervania for Not Working.
- It didn’t work in about 70 percent of people.
- my mets have hardly grown.
- I can't
- I'm not
- not necessarily indicate 
- didn't seem too surprised
- not, um, eat meat?
- negative sentiment
- weird and impossible
- I wasn't very interesting
- not kind of book
- don't expect them to like girl movies
- Illness repulses
- I rolled my eyes
"But I couldn’t picture any of them."
"I didn’t really have much to brag about."
"I am alarmed."
"I’d sooner die."
"It always hurt."
"Twenty pages from the end of Midnight Dawns, things started to look pretty bleak."
But it’s not a cancer book, because cancer books suck.
But in AIA, Anna decides that being a person with cancer who starts a cancer charity is a bit narcissistic.
The Dutch Tulip Man has lots of money and very eccentric ideas about how to treat cancer, but Anna thinks this guy might be a con man and possibly not even Dutch.
But he’d never responded to any of my letters.
Well, I haven’t finished it. It’s six hundred fifty-one pages long and I’ve had twentyfour hours.
I will withhold judgment until I finish. However, I will say that I’m feeling a bit embarrassed to have given you The Price of Dawn.
“If he is anything other than a total gentleman, I’m going to gouge his eyes out.”
No, I picked up the dry cleaning and went to the post office.
There was something flimsy in it.
Tell me my copy is missing the last twenty pages or something.
OH MY GOD DO THEY GET MARRIED OR NOT OH MY GOD WHAT IS THIS
I guess Anna died and so it just ends? CRUEL.
Listening to people howl in misery is not among my favorite pastimes.
Isaac won’t so much as glance over at me.
they reached this one-story, single-room schoolhouse.
“If the bastards can’t take hostages, they just kill them and claim we did it.”
A throaty voice said, “MISSION FAILURE,”
“How can you just break the promise?”
“Sometimes people don’t understand the promises they’re making when they make them,” I said.
“There’s something a little worrisome in your eyes.”
“He never said what happens to the other characters?”
“He doesn’t seem to be online.”
“I actually sort of hate basketball.”
I did not speak to Augustus again for about a week.
But he didn’t.
I banished the thought as best I could.
Nothing to be gained by worrying between now and then.
- Also, is the Dutch Tulip Man a fraud or does he really love them?
- But I’d never dated one.
- I couldn’t even imagine it, really.
- But still I worried.
- So that’s unfortunate.
- “CLEARLY NOT YET.”
- Oh, no. Sorry.
- “Yeah, people keep saying my other senses will improve to compensate, but CLEARLY NOT YET."
- “You don’t know what?” I asked. I looked at his hand because I didn’t want to look at his face blindfolded by bandages.
-  “She hasn’t even visited,” he said.
- “God, that hurts.”
- It’s only been a day, Isaac,” she said, vaguely condescending.
- “You’ve gotta give yourself time to heal.
- “I mean is this my freaking arm or a dartboard?
- There might be a little ouchie.
I don't know how long I have left to get answers to them.
I couldn’t even imagine it, really.
Not your fault, Hazel Grace.
We’re all just side effects, right?
But still I worried.
“Is my wittle fuffywump sickywicky?” he answered.
“That, too,” he said. His mouth tightened. I could see the pain.
“Honestly, I think a hell of a lot more about Monica than my eye. Is that crazy? That’s crazy.”
“I just wish the whole thing hadn’t happened sometimes. The whole cancer thing.”
“I hated leaving him for that but I had to pick up Graham at school,” she said.
“The pain?” I asked.
“I’m sorry,” I said.
(But she looked worried.)
“I sighed loudly. “I was thirteen,” I said.
“I can’t tell if he’s just not ready to confront the seriousness of his disability or if he really does care more about getting dumped by Monica, but he won’t talk about anything else.”
“Few days. Then he goes to this rehab or something for a while, but he gets to sleep at home, I think.”
“Shouldn’t you be in school or something?”
“That was a trick question. I knew the answer, because I am currently at your house.”
“Dad: “You have to understand that Hazel is still sick, Augustus, and will be for the rest of her life. She’ll want to keep up with you, but her lungs—”
“My shoulder hurt. I worried the cancer had spread from my lungs. I imagined the tumor metastasizing into my own bones, boring holes into my skeleton, a slithering eel of insidious intent.”
“That’s too much,” she said, shaking her head. “We can’t accept that from a virtual stranger.”
“Are you kidding? You don’t think Dad would enjoy a few days of watching TV shows that are not about aspiring models and ordering pizza every night, using paper towels as plates so he doesn’t have to do the dishes?”
It all felt Romantic, but not romantic.
But the truth is that I had never wanted him to kiss me, not in the way you are supposed to want these things.
But then again, he hadn’t tried to kiss me; he’d only touched my face, which is not even sexual. It was not a move designed to elicit arousal, but it was certainly a designed move.
So what had he been trying to convey? And why hadn’t I wanted to accept it?
“Hmm,” she said.
“I’m just thinking out loud here.”
"I don’t want to go on dates with anyone. It’s a terrible idea and a huge waste of time and—”
“I’m like. Like. I’m like a grenade, Mom. I’m a grenade and at some point I’m going to blow up and I would like to minimize the casualties, okay?”
“Anyway, eventually I started reading Caroline Mathers’s little notes, which were mostly actually written by her parents, because I guess her brain cancer was of the variety that makes you not you before it makes you not alive.”
“To be with him was to hurt him—inevitably. And that’s what I’d felt as he reached for me: I’d felt as though I were committing an act of violence against him, because I was.”
“Hi, so okay, I don’t know if you’ll understand this but I can’t kiss you or anything. Not that you’d necessarily want to, but I can’t.”
“When I try to look at you like that, all I see is what I’m going to put you through.”
“We’d leave you at an orphanage with a note pinned to your pajamas.”
Screaming made it worse. All stimuli made it worse, actually.
I had been poked and stabbed and poisoned for years, and still I trod on. But make no mistake: In that moment, I would have been very, very happy to die.
They don’t let your family stay with you 24/7 in the ICU at Children’s because it’s an infection risk.
There was wailing down the hall. Somebody’s kid had died.
But my everything hurt when I squeezed.
It wore me out.
My voice was smaller than I wanted it to be. “Thanks for not trying to see me when I looked like hell.”
“Turns out that is not the case,” I said.
“If we’re gonna hang out, it has to be, like, not that.”
1. Were she better or you sicker, then the stars would not be so terribly crossed.
4. We do indeed remember Shakespeare's powerful rhyme, but what do we remember about the person it commemorates? Nothing.
6. Language buries, but does not resurrect.
7. The dead are visible only in the terrible lidless eye of memory.
9. You may not find young Hazel's logic persuasive.
11. Can we call Dr. Maria and ask if international travel would kill me?
I hated Cancer Team Meetings in general, but I hated this one in particular.
“We’re gonna do nothing?”
“You would not be considered a strong candidate for a transplant, unfortunately,” she said.
“My dad started crying a little. I didn’t look over at him, but no one said anything for a long time, so his hiccuping cry was the only sound in the room.”
“I won’t be a mom anymore.” It gutted me pretty badly.
“Placing a patient—one of the most promising Phalanxifor survivors, no less—an eight-hour flight from the only physicians intimately familiar with her case? That’s a recipe for disaster.”
“I can’t go to Amsterdam. One of my doctors thinks it’s a bad idea.”
“But then I would’ve had a probably fatal episode of deoxygenation in Amsterdam, and my body would have been shipped home in the cargo hold of an airplane,” I said.
“I’m gonna die a virgin,” he said.
“It was too pathetic even for me.”
That swing set was still back there, weeds growing out of the little ditch I’d created from kicking myself higher as a little kid.
The thing damn near broke.
The sky was gray and low and full of rain but not yet raining.
The thought of that whole conversation made me want to throw up.
the shortage was particularly acute in that moment.
we couldn’t find anything to watch
I was really tired from my busy day of Having Cancer, so I passed.
Perhaps we should give you one day for the jet lag, yes?
Twelve-year-old leukemic Michael had passed away. He fought hard.
Lucas had relapsed.
She had a scar extending from the side of her nose down her lip and across her cheek.
I felt guilty as soon as I said it.
The TV screen stayed black.
Isaac is a completely suicidal video-game player.
A kid darted out from the kitchen and shouted, "KILL MYSELF."
As Mayhem and Jacks, we stabbed a guy.
He takes video games too seriously.
I couldn't carry one. 
we both lost. 
I didn’t want to have ‘breakfast for dinner.’ 
this ridiculous construction. 
what’s wrong? 
- It was embarrassing to have this lady kneeling in front of me while everyone watched.
- He didn’t reply.
- I was imagining all kinds of Amsterdam trip–ruining fates (arrest, injury, mental breakdown).
- I felt a little hemmed in by Mom.
- "Augustus Waters, noted charismatist, is embarrassed to sit next to a girl with an oxygen tank."
- "Not embarrassed," he said. "They just piss me off sometimes. And I don’t want to be pissed off today."
- "Didn’t feel too friendly," Gus mumbled just loud enough for me to hear.
1. Mom had this big plan that we would sleep for the last several hours of the flight.
4. “But it’s not rising,” I said.
5. He still looked confused.
8. Sleeping meds and narcotics didn’t do for me what they did for normal people.
9. I rolled my eyes.
12. 300 featured a sizable collection of shirtless and well-oiled strapping young lads, so it was not particularly difficult on the eyes, but it was mostly a lot of sword wielding to no real effect.
13. I found the gore a bit gratuitous.
14. “How many dead people do you think there are?”
17. “No, I mean, like, ever. Like, how many people do you think have ever died?”
18. “No, I mean, like, ever. Like, how many people do you think have ever died?”
19. “Sure, anyone can name fourteen dead people."
20. “This isn’t really a poem to read aloud when you are sitting next to your sleeping mother. It has, like, sodomy and angel dust in it,” I said.
My mouth tasted horrible, and I tried to keep it shut for fear of poisoning the airplane.
The land seemed sunk into the ocean, little rectangles of green surrounded on all sides by canals.
We landed, in fact, parallel to a canal.
“Indiana,” he said. “They steal the land from the Indians and leave the name, yes?”
Beside the highway, flat empty land stretched for miles.
“This is Amsterdam?” I asked the cabdriver.
Our room was small: a double bed pressed against a wall with my BiPAP machine, an oxygen concentrator, and a dozen refillable oxygen tanks at the foot of the bed.
I hated talking with that thing on
“Mom,” I said, “you didn’t have to stay here.”
I still felt bad.
I feel underdressed.
The suit you wear to funerals, I assume?
“Actually, no,” he said. “That suit isn’t nearly this nice.”
"Stupid human voices always ruining everything."
"We don’t speak Dutch."
"It still might not work, you know?"
"It’s your death suit."
"I looked down, feeling bashful."
"That’s not funny, " he said, looking at the street.
I'd always associated belief in heaven with, frankly, a kind of intellectual disengagement.
I don’t believe we return to haunt or comfort the living or anything.
I fear oblivion.
If you don’t live a life in service of a greater good, you’ve gotta at least die a death in service of a greater good, you know?
I just shook my head.
“Your obsession with, like, dying for something or leaving behind some great sign of your heroism or whatever. It’s just weird.”
“Not everyone,” I said, unable to disguise my annoyance.
“That’s a really mean thing to say to me.”
I worried I might puke, actually, because I often puked after eating.
I’m sorry,” he said again, reaching across the table for my hand.
I could be worse.
I took a bite of dessert to make it appear like it was not that big of a deal to me.
“I didn’t mean it like that."
It was ridiculous.
It was ridiculous.
All attempts to go back to sleep
failed, so I lay there with the BiPAP pumping the air in and urging it out, enjoying the dragon sounds but wishing I could choose my breaths.
The shirt was a screen print of a famous Surrealist artwork by René Magritte in which he drew a pipe and then beneath it wrote in cursive Ceci n’est pas une pipe. (“This is not a pipe.”)
“I just don’t get that shirt,” Mom said.
“I’m going to the Rijksmuseum and the Vondelpark today,” she said. “Plus, I just don’t get his book. No offense.
“What’s imperial about it?” he asked. “Is it like a Caesar salad imperialism sort of thing, or like British Empire imperialism, or what?”
He had really ugly feet.
I could hear annoyance in his voice.
“You wrongly assume that I need to hear your question in order to answer it.”
“What happened to them? They all ceased to exist the moment the novel ended.”
“You are a side effect.”
“No, and I’ll thank you not to curse in my house.”
1. I was tired and sweaty and worried that I generally looked and smelled gross.
2. "What an assclown," Augustus said.
3. He winced in pain and lost his grip on the door for a second.
4. I became convinced he was trying to figure out a way not to hook up with me.
5. It was unladylike and therefore had disgusted Augustus Waters.
6. He said, "It's above my knee and it just tapers a little and then it's just skin. There's a nasty scar."
9. Idiotically, it occurred to me that my pink underwear didn't match my purple bra.
11. "I'm starting to think you have an amputee fetish," he answered.
13. "Misuse of literality," I said.
14. "No," he said. "So. Tired."
Maslow’s pyramid seemed to imply that I was less human than other people, and most people seemed to agree with him.
“No,” I said. Panic rolled in, pulled me under.
“I’m sorry I didn’t tell you,” he said, his voice calm. “Your mom must know. The way she looked at me. My mom must’ve just told her or something. I should’ve told you. It was stupid. Selfish.”
I knew why he hadn’t said anything, of course: the same reason I hadn’t wanted him to see me in the ICU.
It’s not fair,” I said. “It’s just so goddamned unfair.”
I was crying.
“No, we couldn’t have,” he answered. “Anyway, it wasn’t working. I could tell it
wasn’t working, you know?”
"It’s just bullshit, the whole thing," I said.
"Does it hurt?" I asked.
"But Not. One. Single. Cancer. Kid. Nobody biting it from the plague or smallpox or yellow fever or whatever, because there is no glory in illness. There is no meaning to it. There is no honor in dying of."
“I don’t think you’re dying,” I said. “I think you’ve just got a touch of cancer.”
“Mr. Martinez told us that up in the clouds the wind blew one hundred and fifty miles an hour and the temperature was thirty below zero and there was no oxygen and we’d all die within seconds.”
“He specialized in the murder of dreams, Hazel Grace, let me tell you."
"It’s all just soulless molecules bouncing against each other randomly."
"Gus had a recurrence,” I said.
“Also, it was a bit hopeless,” he said. “A bit defeatist.”
"I don’t think defeatism is honest,” Dad answered. 
“I’m pretty sure all asses are blind,” Isaac answered.
- Total radio silence
- an unfathomable injustice
- not contacting your former boyfriend after his eyes get cut out of his freaking head
- vandalism made me nervous
- deservedly egged by a blind man
- confused and scared and worried
Gus’s father: “Our children are weird.”
“He had a tough night, Hazel,” she said. “His heart is working too hard. He needs to scale back on activity. Wheelchairs from here on out. They’re putting him on some new medicine that should be better for the pain."
It felt weird.
Here are the sentences with negative sentiment:
- after he had eaten and puked up breakfast.
- Gus didn’t eat.
- I’m just so damned tired all the time.
- bouncing down crazily in a way that would have been dangerous if danger retained its relevance.
- It’s hard as hell to hold on to your dignity when the risen sun is too bright in your losing eyes.
- me having to reveal that it was all a ruse, and the ensuing mutual humiliation.
- leaving Gus to eat (and puke up) his own dinner.
I found him mumbling in a language of his own creation. He’d pissed the bed. It was awful. I couldn’t even look, really.
When I came back down, he was slowly waking up out of the narcotics to the excruciating day.
he sucked almost as bad as I did,
we couldn’t go five minutes without both getting dead. Not fancy heroic deaths either, just careless ones.
I was hoping he didn’t remember that I’d found the boy I love deranged in a wide pool of his own piss.
“I’ve pissed the bed, Gus, believe me. It’s no big deal.”
But unfortunately, he remembered. “With each passing minute, I’m developing a deeper appreciation of the word mortified,”
“I don’t mean—” I started.
I glanced at the alarm clock: 2:35 A.M.
He’s gone, I thought as everything inside of me collapsed into a singularity.
I could barely creak out a “Hello?”
I waited for the sound of a parent’s annihilated voice.
“I hate myself I hate myself I hate this I hate this I disgust myself I hate it I hate it I hate it just let me fucking die.”
“I’m sorry. I wish it was like that movie, with the Persians and the Spartans.”
“But it isn’t,” I said.
He nodded a little and then his eyes closed, his head swiveling on his neck.
He came home from the hospital a few days later, finally and irrevocably robbed of his ambitions.
It took more medication to remove him from the pain.
“I don’t see anything next to it.”
“It’s my last shred of dignity. It’s very small.”
They didn’t like me to ring the doorbell anymore because it might wake him up.
“He’s dying,” said another.
He was cold all the time for some reason.
“Okay, enough,” Gus’s dad said.
Here are the sentences with a negative sentiment:
- I’d taken a day off from visiting Augustus because I was feeling a bit unwell myself: nothing specific, just tired.
- “Um,” I said.
- “I assume that’s a rhetorical question.”
- “The cannula,” I whined. “I need it.”
- “Hazel, apologize to your mother.”
- They didn’t say anything. Mom just sat there with her arms folded, not even looking at me.
- “It took the entire drive to calm down about my parents.”
Here are the sentences with a negative sentiment:
1. Augustus Waters died eight days after his prefuneral, at Memorial, in the ICU, when the cancer, which was made of him, finally stopped his heart, which was also made of him.
3. everything inside of me collapsed.
4. she told me she was sorry, and I said I was sorry, too.
5. The only person I really wanted to talk to about Augustus Waters’s death was Augustus Waters.
6. It was unbearable.
7. Every second worse than the last.
8. leaving me floating faceup on the water, undrowned.
9. The dead air on the line was no comfort, and finally, I hung up.
14. I pictured a church packed with people who thought he liked basketball, and I wanted to puke.
15. it infuriated me: You get all these friends just when you don’t need friends anymore.
16. I knew these people were genuinely sad, and that I wasn’t really mad at them. I was mad at the universe.
There were maybe eighty chairs set up in the room, and it was two-thirds full but felt one-third empty.
because no one wants to touch the dead.
They both looked so old—their eye sockets hollowed, the skin sagging from their exhausted faces.
I had—and have—absolutely no confidence that he could hear me.
After a moment, he whispered, “We gotta fake pray,” and bowed his head.
I went on spouting bullshit Encouragements as Gus’s parents, arm in arm, hugged each other and nodded at every word.
And for me, that was the final and truly unbearable tragedy: Like all the innumerable dead, he’d once and for all been demoted from haunted to haunter.
It looked like any other funeral.
“Just . . .” I said. I felt so little in the backseat for some reason. I kind of wanted to be little. I wanted to be like six years old or something.
- I was in no mood for this.
- I think you’re a pathetic alcoholic who says fancy things to get attention like a really precocious eleven-year-old and I feel super bad for you.
- But yeah, no, you’re not the guy who wrote An Imperial Affliction anymore, so you couldn’t sequel it even if you wanted to.
- Now get out of the car.
- Waking up was horrible.
- There were Peter Van Houtens—miserable creatures who scoured the earth in search of something to hurt.
- Neither of these futures struck me as particularly desirable.
- Why did breathing have to be such work?
- It’s total bullshit.
- The whole thing. Eighty percent survival rate and he’s in the twenty percent? Bullshit.
“He was really fighting for breath, I guess,” he said. “He eventually went unconscious,
but it sounds like, yeah, it wasn’t great or anything. Dying sucks.”
